## Настройка конфигурации приложения

The Symfony Standard Edition recommends the use of a parameters.yml file to contain 
configuration values that are specific for an instance of the project, be it on a production 
server or on the developer’s computer. The configuration values defined in config.yml contain 
placeholders, pointing to parameters in parameters.yml, which are loaded in the imports section:

```yaml
imports:
    - { resource: parameters.yml }
doctrine:
    dbal:
        user:     %database_user%
        password: %database_password%
```

In parameters.yml you should then define:

```yaml
parameters:
    database_user:     matthias
    database_password: cookies
```

Or you will get a nasty exception when you run the application:

```
You have requested a non-existent parameter "database_user".
```

This set-up soon gets impractical. The more dependencies you have in your project, 
the more configuration values will differ between you and your colleagues (let alone 
between your machine and the production server). So the list in parameters.yml gets 
longer and longer and every time a team member adds another parameter to the list, 
you will get another ParameterNotFoundException after pulling the changes from the 
repository.

This method is also very inflexible when you want to change the behavior of some 
bundles without making these changes permanent. Chances are you will accidentally 
commit things like:

```yaml
# in config.yml
swiftmailer:
    # deliver all emails sent by the application to this address:
    delivery_address: matthiasnoback@gmail.com
```

Of course you can define another parameter for it:

```yaml
#in config.yml
    swiftmailer:
        delivery_address: %developer_email_address%

#in parameters.yml
    parameters:
        developer_email_address: matthiasnoback@gmail.com
```

But your colleagues may not want to change the default behavior, they just want everything 
to keep working when they update the project.

### 10.1 Use local configuration files

The best solution for this problem is to use configuration files which only exist locally. 
For each environment you can create a `local_{env}.yml` configuration file. You can then load 
these local configuration files after loading the original config_{env}.yml files. To accomplish 
this, modify `app/AppKernel.php`:

```php
public function registerContainerConfiguration(LoaderInterface $loader)
{
    $loader->load(__DIR__.'/config/config_'.$this->getEnvironment().'.yml');

    $localFile = __DIR__.'/config/local_'.$this->getEnvironment().'.yml';

    if (is_file($localFile)) {
        $loader->load($localFile);
    }
}
```

Because the local configuration file will be loaded after the general configuration file, 
each developer can override any part of the project configuration. When a local configuration 
file does not exist, the application won’t fail to load. This means that deploying your application 
does not require an extra step.

Don’t forget to add the `local_{env}.yml` files to your `.gitignore` file. It would also be a good 
idea to add .dist versions of the local_{env}.yml files, containing some useful suggestions for 
teammates. Make sure all of these suggestions are commented out:

```yaml
#local_dev.yml.dist
imports:
    - { resource: config_dev.yml }

#swiftmailer:
#    delivery_address: your-mail-address@host
```

And also make sure that the `local_{env}.yml.dist` files *will* be committed to your repository. 

#### Keep parameters.yml

It would still be a good idea to use parameters for some required configuration values. For example, 
without a database username and password, your whole application will not work, so it makes sense 
to ask for these values when installing or updating the project.

If you have a Symfony project with Symfony version less than 2.3, you should install 
[ParameterHandler](https://github.com/Incenteev/ParameterHandler) (create by Incenteev) in your project. 
From then on, after installing or updating using [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) the ParameterHandler 
compares the contents of parameters.yml.dist with the contents of your current parameters.yml and asks 
you to supply the missing values.

> #### @dbykadorov: в версиях Symfony 2.3 и старше Incenteev ParameterHandler 
> [доступен "из коробки"](http://symfony.com/blog/new-in-symfony-2-3-interactive-management-of-the-parameters-yml-file)

#### Add a default_parameters.yml

Though this configuration setup is becoming pretty flexible already, there are situations where you
want to use yet another extra way of configuring things. Consider this MongoDB configuration:

```yaml
doctrine_mongodb:
    connections:
        default:
            server: mongodb://%mongo_host%:%mongo_port%
```

You don’t want to copy this entire hierarchy to your `local_dev.yml` file to get things up and running 
on your own machine. You want to be able to use the parameters %mongo_host% and %mongo_port%. 
Yet in the default setup of your application these parameters may not vary much. On most developer 
machines, the host and the port for MongoDB are the same. For this situation, add a 
default_parameters.yml, which contains these parameters, so when making a fresh install of the project, 
developers don’t have to provide these values. Import this file before importing parameters.yml:

```yaml
# in config.yml
imports:
    - { resource: default_parameters.yml }
    - { resource: parameters.yml }

#...
```

In default_parameters.yml you could now add:

```yaml
# in default_parameters.yml
parameters:
    mongo_host: localhost
    mongo_port: 27017
```

And in case your personal MongoDB database is on a different host or port, you can override just 
these values in parameters.yml:

```yaml
# in parameters.yml
parameters:
    mongo_port: 71072
```

When you are using the ParameterHandler mentioned above, in combination with both a default_parameters.yml 
and a parameters.yml, make sure to add these options to composer.json:

"file": "app/config/parameters.yml", "keep-outdated": true

This way, extra parameters in parameters.yml that override values from default_parameters.yml and are not 
mentioned in parameters.yml.dist will not be automatically removed from parameters.yml.

> #### In conclusion
>
> Parameters in parameters.yml are essential for a functional application.
>
> Parameters in default_parameters.yml are fallback parameters, you don’t have to define
> them in parameters.yml, but you can override them.
>
> local_{env}.yml files contain overridden configuration, for your specific situation as a developer.