## Соглашения по конфигурированию

Most parts of the application configuration can be loaded from files in many different formats. 
The application configuration can be provided using plain PHP, Yaml, INI and XML files. The same 
(except for the INI format) is true for the routing and validation configuration. But these two 
also add annotations as an option, and so does Doctrine when it comes to entity and document mapping 
metadata.

You already have the application configuration in order (see the previous chapter), now you have to 
make choices for your team (maybe settle on this topic together) about the other configuration formats 
you are going to use in your application.

> #### Make a choice and stick with it
>
> Remember it is less important what you choose (though some formats are more readable or strict than 
> others), it’s more important that you stick with your choices and that you enforce this standard in 
> the entire application.

### Routing

Routing as well as template configuration is preferably defined inside the controllers themselves, 
using annotations:

```php
use Sensio\Bundle\FrameworkExtraBundle\Configuration\Route; 
use Sensio\Bundle\FrameworkExtraBundle\Configuration\Method; 
use Sensio\Bundle\FrameworkExtraBundle\Configuration\Template;

 /**
  * @Route("/account")
  */
classAccountController
    /**
     * @Route("/new")
     * @Method({"GET","POST"})
     * @Template
     */
    public function newAction() {
        return array();
    }
}
```

Each bundle should have a Resources/config/routing.yml file, which loads each controller as a resource:

```yaml
MatthiasAccountBundle_AccountController:
    resource: "@MatthiasAccountBundle/Controller/AccountController.php"
    type: annotation

MatthiasAccountBundle_CredentialsController:
    resource: "@MatthiasAccountBundle/Controller/CredentialsController.php"
    type: annotation

#...
```

Though less explicit, you may also choose to load the routing for an entire controller directory at once:

```yaml
MatthiasAccountBundleControllers:
    resource: "@MatthiasAccountBundle/Controller/"
    type: annotation
```

The application routing configuration in /app/config/routing.yml should have references to the 
routing.yml files of the active bundles:

```yaml
MatthiasAccountBundle:
    resource: "@MatthiasAccountBundle/Resources/config/routing.yml"
```

#### Choosing Route Names

Route names often become one big mess. We have account_new, account_index, accounts, account_list, etc. 
When an action name changes, the old route name keeps popping up. And when another controller also has a 
route named accounts, it will override the other already existing route, or be overridden itself.

The solution is very simple: follow this pattern (it may sound familiar):

```
{name of thebundle without "Bundle"}.{name of the controller without "Controller"}.{name of the action without "Action"}
```

For example, the AccountController above has an action newAction. The controller is part of the 
MatthiasAccountBundle, so its route name should be matthias_account.account.new:

```php
/**
 * @Route("/new", name="matthias_account.account.new")
 */
```

Remember: when you change a route name, make sure you do a project-wide search-and-replace for 
occurrences of the route name.

### Services

Define your services using XML files. This gives you automatic XML validation, auto-completion and 
nice syntax highlighting (at least when you are using an IDE which supports this).

```xml
<?xmlversion="1.0"?>
<container xmlns="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services" 
           xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" 
           xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services
           http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services/services-1.0.xsd">
    <services>
        <service id="matthias_account.account_controller"
            class="Matthias\AccountBundle\Controller\AccountController">
        </service>
    </services>
</container>
```

When choosing ids for services, use only underscores and lowercase characters. Optionally provide 
namespacing using dots. The service id for the service of class MailManager inside the 
MatthiasAccountBundle may be matthias_account.mail_manager.

In case your services are divided into several service files, which are all grouped by a common theme 
(like metadata, form, etc.), you could insert an extra namespace in the service ids. For instance the 
service id for the form type of class CreateAccountType in the MatthiasAccountBundle, defined in the 
form.xml service definition file, may get the id matthias_account.form.create_account_type.

### Mapping metadata

The preferred way of configuring your entities or documents is to use annotations:

```php
/**
 * @ORM\Entity
 * @ORM\Table(name="accounts")
 */
class Account
{
    /**
     * @ORM\Id
     * @ORM\Column(type="secure_random_id")
     */
    private $id; 
}
```

When it comes to (potentially) reusable code, you should not use any annotations. Read more about this 
in Storage-agnostic models.

> #### Recommended conventions
> 
> Configure:
>
> - The application in general using Yaml files. 
> - Routing using annotations and Yaml files. 
> - Service definitions using XML files.
> - Documents and entities using annotations.