## 15 Input validation

Any input your application receives from the outside world should be checked and processed before
actually being used or stored in any way.

### 15.1 Safe forms

Symfony has several important tools that you can use in the fight for clean input: the Form
Component and the Validator Component. Most Symfony developers already trust the Form
Component with their lives:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
if ($request->isMethod('POST')) {
    $form->bind($request);
    if ($form->isValid()) {
        // persist!
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is mostly a good thing since the Form and Validator Component both are quite good, and
they can be trusted to do what they say. But: you should not trust them blindly (what can you trust
blindly?).

#### HTML5 validation

Back in the days when we used to write PHP applications by hand from start to end, we were taught
to validate form input. For instance we did not want users to leave the “name” field blank. But now
we can build a form in a form (which represents the field) and we set it’s required option to true.
When you open the form in the browser and try to submit it with no values inserted, it will show you
a nice error message (which is in fact a feature of HTML5) instead of immediately submitting the
form. However, if you disable this client-side validation, by adding a novalidate HTML5 attribute to
the form tag, you will notice that by default there is no server-side validation at all. So, the first thing
you need to do when working with forms (and maybe for the dev environment only) is disabling
the HTML5 validation:

{lang="html"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<form{% if app.debug %} novalidate="true"{% endif %}>
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now you can test the server-side validation of your form.

#### Validation constraints

Usually you have some domain object, let’s say an entity, that you want to create or modify using
a form. You would then set the form’s data_class option to the class name of this entity. In the
buildForm method you can instruct the FormBuilder to add certain fields corresponding to attributes
of the entity. Now to validate the form data, you need to be very secure in adding constraints to the
attributes (in my opinion preferably using annotations). This is nothing but the usual, and it’s 
[very well documented](http://symfony.com/doc/master/book/forms.html):

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\AccountBundle\Entity;

use Symfony\Component\Validator\Constraints as Assert;

class User
{
    /**
     * @Assert\Email()
     * @Assert\NotBlank()
     */
    private $emailAddress;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #### Custom validation constraints
> 
> There are times where the standard validation constraints bundled with the Symfony
> Validator Component are not (specific) enough for validating your data. Don’t give up
> and add [custom validation constraints](http://symfony.com/doc/current/cookbook/validation/custom_constraint.html), 
> and custom validators for validating this data.

#### Forms without an entity

When you have data which does not have a one-to-one correspondence to an entity, the Forms
documentation tells you that you can just provide no data class and in fact build the form inline
inside your controller:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
public function contactAction(Request $request)
{
    $defaultData = array('message' => 'Type your message here');
    $form = $this->createFormBuilder($defaultData)
        ->add('name', 'text')
        ->add('email', 'email')
        ->add('message', 'textarea')
        ->getForm();

    $form->handleRequest($request);

    if ($form->isValid()) {
        // data is an array with "name", "email", and "message" keys
        $data = $form->getData();
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This to me sounds like a bad idea, for two reasons: first of all, you should always define a form
using a custom form type (extending from AbstractType), like this:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\Form\AbstractType;
use Symfony\Component\Form\FormBuilderInterface;

class ContactFormType extends AbstractType
{
    public function buildForm(
        FormBuilderInterface $builder,
        array $options
    ) {
        $builder
            ->add('name', 'text')
            ->add('email', 'email')
            ->add('message', 'textarea')
        ;
    }

    public function getName()
    {
        return 'contact_form';
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This will put all the logic related to the form in one place, making it reusable and much better
maintainable.

But you should also always provide a data_class option. The data from the contact form will
not be persisted, but still it has a certain coherent structure and also a very clear meaning. So choose
a suitable name for the data object of your form, like ContactDetails, create a class with the right
fields and add some assertions to each field to ensure the object contains consistent data:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\Validator\Constraints as Assert;

class ContactDetails
{
    /**
     * @Assert\NotBlank
     */
    private $name;

    /**
     * @Assert\NotBlank
     * @Assert\Email
     */
    private $email;

    /**
     * @Assert\NotBlank
     */
    private $message;

    // add getters and setters for all fields
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now set this class as the data_class option of the ContactFormType:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\OptionsResolver\OptionsResolverInterface;

class ContactFormType extends AbstractType
{
    public function setDefaultOptions(OptionsResolverInterface $resolver)
    {
        $resolver->setDefaults(array(
            'data_class' => 'LifeOnline\ContactBundle\Model\ContactDetails'
        ));
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Your data will be in much better shape since it is now encapsulated, validated and totally under
control. You can:
-  Prevent bad data from entering the attributes by filtering the data in setters:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class ContactDetails
{
    public function setMessage($message)
    {
        $this->message = strip_tags($message);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Provide default values a lot easier (without having to know the structure of the expected
array):

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
public function contactAction(Request $request)
{
    $contactDetails = ContactDetails::createForUser($this->getUser());

    $form = $this->createForm(new ContactFormType(), $contactDetails);

    // ...
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Work with an object of a known type, after binding and validating the form:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
public function contactAction(Request $request)
{
    $form = $this->createForm(new ContactFormType());

    if ($request->isMethod('POST')) {
        $form->bind($request);
        if ($form->isValid()) {
            $contactDetails = $form->getData();

            // $contactDetails is an instance of ContactDetails
        }
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> All forms in your application should…
> 
> - Have a data_class option pointing to a specific class.
> - Be defined in their own class extending from AbstractType.
> - Preferably have their own service definition, for better reusability.

### 15.2 Validate values from Request

The Request object is in part just a wrapper for PHP’s superglobals. In /web/app.php you can see
how the Request object gets created:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
$request = Request::createFromGlobals();
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Inside this method you find this simple line of code:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
$request = new static($_GET, $_POST, array(), $_COOKIE, $_FILES, $_SERVER);
~~~~~~~~~~~~

So even though it may feel much more secure to fetch request data using $request->query->get('page'),
it is in fact no more secure than just `$_GET['page']`. Though within the Symfony context it is always
better to use the methods on the Request class, you should still be wary about these values, validate
them and force them into the right format. Strict typing, and checking for allowed values and ranges
is quite necessary.

#### Request attributes

##### Route parameters

First of all, when a URI pattern contains wildcard values, like id in /comment/{id}, and a
certain request matches this pattern, the RouterListener will make sure that all the parameters
are copied over to the request object as attributes. These request attributes will be used by the
ControllerResolver to collect arguments for the controller based on its parameter names and type
hints. See [Events leading to a response](#events_leading_to_a_response) for a more detailed explanation 
of this process.

Since most controller arguments are being copied more or less directly from the URI of the
request, you need to be extra careful when it comes to handling them. First of all you have to
think about requirements for route parameters (like id). Requirements are to be defined as regular
expressions. The default requirement for route parameters is [ˆ/]+: they may contain any character
except a slash. So you must always define your own requirements, like \w+, which means at least
one “word” character (i.e. a-z, A-Z or 0-9, or underscore) or \d+, which means at least one “number”
character (i.e. 0-9). If you don’t know regular expressions yet, you should really learn them (as you
may have noticed they are also used when working with paths defined in security.yml). Below
you will find some examples of route parameters with requirements:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
/**
 * id can only be a number:
 * @Route("/comment/{id}", requirements={"id"="\d+"})
 */

/**
 * alias can be at least one lowercase letter, a number or a dash:
 * @Route("/user/{alias}", requirements={"alias"="[a-z0-9\-]+"})
 */

/**
 * type can only be commercial or non-commercial:
 * @Route("/create-account/{type}", requirements={
 * "type"="commercial|non-commercial"
 * })
 */
~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is important to verify the correctness of these values in this early stage, otherwise incorrect values 
might result as arguments of method calls to services, where they may cause
InvalidArgumentExceptions, or worse: unexplainable errors.

#### Query or request parameters

There are also situations where you want to be more flexible concerning the input for your controller:
you may want to support query parameters in your URI, like ?page=1, or request parameters sent
using the content of the request (e.g. POST data). But these values are by no means trustworthy.
Query and POST data can both easily be modified to not be what you expect it to be. Therefore,
when you retrieve this data from the Request object:

- Let validation be handled by the Form and Validator Component by using Form::bind() and
Form::isValid()
- Or:
    - Cast the values to the type that you expect (in most situations either a string or an
    integer) and
    - Validate these values yourself by calling the validateValue() method of the validator
    service. You could think of validating the range of a value (“should be at least 1”), or one
    of multiple options (“should be any of ‘commercial’, ‘non-commercial’”).

For instance:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\Validator\Constraints\Choice;

public function createAccountAction()
{
    $userTypeConstraint = new Choice(array(
        'choices' => array('commercial', 'non-commercial')
    );

    $errorList = $this->get('validator')->validateValue(
        $request->query->get('userType'),
        $userTypeConstraint
    );

    if (count($errorList) == 0) {
        // the provided user type is valid
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #### Don’t use $request->get()
> Don’t use $request->get(), because this is what happens inside:
> 
> {lang="php"}
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> public function get($key, $default = null, $deep = false)
> {
>     return $this->query->get($key,
>         $this->attributes->get($key,
>             $this->request->get($key, $default, $deep),
>         $deep),
>     $deep);
> }
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Always retrieve values specifically from the query, the request data or the request
attributes. When you are used to using PHP superglobals, this is the translation to the
respective parameter bags of the Request class:
$_GET['key'] ) “$request->query->get(‘key’)
$_POST['key'] ) “$request->request->get(‘key’)

##### Use the ParamFetcher

There is one tool that I would like to mention here. It is part of the 
[FOSRestBundle](https://github.com/FriendsOfSymfony/FOSRestBundle) which provides many tools for easily 
creating a REST-like webservice. It provides a very nice way of pre-validating query parameters by first 
adding some configuration in the form of an annotation for each query parameter that you need. For example, 
this is how you can configure a page query parameter which should consist only of digits, being “1” 
by default: 

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use FOS\RestBundle\Request\ParamFetcher;
use FOS\RestBundle\Controller\Annotations\QueryParam;

/**
 * @QueryParam(
 *   name="page",
 *   requirements="\d+",
 *   default="1",
 *   description="Page number"
 * )
 */
public function listAction(ParamFetcher $paramFetcher)
{
    $page = $paramFetcher->get('page');
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

It works almost exactly the same for POST data without a corresponding form:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use FOS\RestBundle\Request\ParamFetcher;
use FOS\RestBundle\Controller\Annotations\RequestParam;

/**
 * @RequestParam(name="username", requirements="\w+")
 */
public function deleteAccountAction(ParamFetcher $paramFetcher)
{
    ...
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Even though your application will not have a REST API, you can still just install the FOSRestBundle 
bundle without many side-effects. Just make sure you disable all built-in listeners except the
ParamFetcherListener:

{lang="yml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
# in /app/config/config.yml
fos_rest:
    param_fetcher_listener: true
~~~~~~~~~~~~

### 15.3 Sanitizing HTML

You likely have forms in your application allowing users to enter some kind of rich text, with bold,
italic or underlined text, and maybe you allow users to add their own link tags. Well, this is of course
a very dangerous thing when it comes to security. You should take very good care of restricting users
in their use of HTML tags but also in them adding HTML attributes, which can actually be more
dangerous, especially when they contain JavaScript. And don’t think that alert('Hi!'); is the worst
thing a user can do. Even mismatching tags can spoil things - think about what a simple </div> in
some random spot could do in most sites.

First of all: don’t rely on things like Markdown to solve your HTML injection problem. The
specification of Markdown clearly says that any HTML in the source text should be left intact and
added “as is” to the generated output. Second: don’t rely on the second argument of strip_tags
to allow some tags since this also allows any attribute for these tags. Third: don’t dream up your
own regular expressions for allowing some tags and attributes. There will always be hacks that
circumvent your handwritten rules. Instead, use [HTMLPurifier](http://htmlpurifier.org/) and configure 
it properly for specific situations allowing rich (HTML) text.

There is an excellent bundle which integrates HTMLPurifier with any Symfony application:
the [ExerciseHTMLPurifierBundle](https://github.com/Exercise/HTMLPurifierBundle). It defines HTMLPurifier 
services for each configuration set you define in config.yml. It also supports automatic filtering of 
form values.

#### Automatic sanitizing

The thing is: with every Symfony application you have to manually take care of sanitizing input.
It would be great if all request attributes would be automatically filtered according to some rules,
or when every form or entity would contain only known-to-be-clean values. Unfortunately there
is no such thing in the open source world that I am aware of right now. A prototype of the desired
functionality can be found in the [DMSFilterBundle](https://github.com/rdohms/DMSFilterBundle), but in 
its current state this bundle does not handle every situation well. It filters only form input for the 
root objects of forms. It also does not filter values manually set upon entities, documents, etc.