14 Controller design
When it comes to controller design, I recommend creating small controller classes. First of all this means grouping logically related actions together in one controller class, but also creating only small actions, with no real logic inside and at most two possible execution paths. This may mean that you end up with many controllers, but this method has many advantages, which are also related to security:
1. When you need to change some user-related behavior, you can very quickly find your way from URL, to route name, to controller.
2. When some controllers need special attention from a security point of view, you can easily spot them and concentrate the protection logic in one place.
To illustrate the second point, let’s say you have one controller concerned with personal settings, but it relates to data like strictly personal account information, payment information like a credit card number and public profile data, like a nickname or an avatar. I would recommend splitting the pages concerned with viewing and editing this data over multiple controllers, each with a simple and recognizable name. Inside the controllers, each action should also have a recognizable name, which can be longer than you think, like AccountController::editAccountInformation (instead of just “edit”) and PaymentController::listCreditCards. This allows you to align your personal alertness level with the level required by the specific code you are going to work on.
Furthermore it should be clear by looking at the code, which controllers are used for modifying the state of the application, i.e. persist or remove some data. You should explicitly define the HTTP methods allowed for a given action. In this sense, pages that can be requested using the GET method are innocent, and pages to which users can POST data, are not.
useSensio\Bundle\FrameworkExtraBundle\Configuration\Method;
/**
 * @Method("GET")
 */
publicfunctionviewPublicProfileAction()
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
}
/**
 * @Method("POST")
 */
publicfunctionupdatePublicProfileAction() {
}
Of course, it is already bad when someone can view an edit form without the given object being an object he can modify, but it is worse if he can do real modifications to the object.
14.1 Secure actions
There are many ways in which you can secure actions. The action code itself will sometimes throw an AccessDeniedException, and of course, you should check that a certain object belongs to someone, or can be modified by someone (either because the owner is stored as a property of an object, or because the correct rights are registered using ACL). But you should also implement role management in some way. Roles are very cheap when using Symfony. Just think of a new one and it already exists. When existing roles should include the new role, add it to the “role hierarchy” as defined in security.yml.
It is very important to start adding a list of roles for any controller which requires a user to be logged in. There are some good reasons for this. First of all, when it comes to security you should adhere to the principle of “least privilege”. This means that by default an authenticated user can do nothing at all (maybe only change his password). You, the system, or an administrator will have to give him extra rights first. You can use all kinds of expressions concerning roles above an action, using the @PreAuthorize annotation, but in most situations I have encountered, a simple @Secure suffices:
useJMS\SecurityExtraBundle\Annotation\Secure;
/**
 * @Secure("ROLE_PAGE_EDITOR")
 */
publicfunctioneditPageAction()
1
2
3
4
5
6 7{ 8}
Controller design 116
Often there are different types of users who should have access to this editPageAction, for instance a user with ROLE_ADMINISTRATOR but also someone with ROLE_CONTENT_MANAGER. The solu- tion here is not to add extra roles to the @Secure annotation (like @Secure({"ROLE_ADMINISTRATOR", "ROLE_CONTENT_MANAGER"})) but to solve this by changing the role hierarchy:
1 2 3 4
security:
    role_hierarchy:
        ROLE_ADMINISTRATOR: [ROLE_PAGE_EDITOR]
        ROLE_CONTENT_MANAGER: [ROLE_PAGE_EDITOR]
When it comes to roles, remember:
• Roles are volatile: you are free to create and almost free to remove them (basically they are just strings)
• It works best when a role describes the user having the role (role names ideally end with “MANAGER”, “EDITOR”, “MODERATOR”, etc.)
14.2 Putting controllers behind the firewall
Now that you have many controllers all inside something like a SettingsBundle, you should import them all in this bundle’s routing.yml file:
SettingsBundleControllers:
    resource: "@SettingsBundle/Controller/"
    type: annotation
This entire file can be imported at once from the applications’ routing.yml file. This enables you to define a prefix for all routes in the SettingsBundle together:
SettingsBundle:
    resource: "@SettingsBundle/Resources/config/routing.yml"
    type: yaml
    prefix: /settings
Using this prefix, you can easily define a set of required roles for any URI starting with /settings:
security:
    access_control:
        - { path: ^/settings, roles: [IS_AUTHENTICATED_FULLY] }
The line above means that you need to be fully authenticated to do anything on settings-related pages (when you are logged in just by a “remember me” cookie, this would not suffice to grant you access). This is a good thing, and you now also have a single point of control for this security measure.