## 13 Authentication and sessions

As I mentioned earlier, Symfony already takes care of many cases concerning logging in and out, and also has 
settings for many of the desired behaviors, available in config.yml and security.yml. For instance you can 
alter some security-related PHP settings directly from within config.yml:

{lang="yaml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
framework:
    session:
        # session cookie name
        name: matthias_session
        # session cookie should not be accessible using JavaScript
        cookie_httponly: true
        # session data should expire in n seconds (when not used)
        gc_maxlifetime: 3600
        # expired session data will be garbage collected with a 1:10 chance
        gc_probability: 1
        gc_divisor: 10
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Symfony takes care of migrating the session (effectively changing the session ID) when you are
logging in, to prevent the old, unauthenticated session from getting extra rights (should this session
be compromised at any time). Symfony also takes care of invalidating the authenticated session after
logging out, to prevent session hijacking. This works just fine by default, but could be configured
explicitly in security.yml:

{lang="yaml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
security:
    # after authentication, the session will be migrated
    session_fixation_strategy: migrate

    firewalls:
        secured_area:
            logout:
            # the authenticated session will be unavailable afterwards
            invalidate_session: trueAuthentication and sessions 111
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### 13.1 Invalidating sessions

#### Session hijacking

All nice and well, but there are some things missing. In the first place, when you would be able to
track down the session id of an authenticated user and use it in your own session cookie to take
over the authenticated session of a user, no one would notice. You would also not be hindered in
your attempt. This means, you have to track changes in the “signature” of the user. For instance, you
could check the client’s IP address, or his User Agent. Changes in these client characteristics should
at the very least be logged, so that you can monitor suspicious behavior. But you may also require a
user to re-authenticate and thereby confirm that the changed signature was not intended as a threat
to your application.

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\SecurityBundle\EventListener;

use Matthias\SecurityBundle\Exception\UserSignatureChangedException;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\GetResponseEvent;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\HttpKernelInterface;

class UserSignatureListener
{
    public function onKernelRequest(GetResponseEvent $event)
    {
        if ($event->getRequestType() !== HttpKernelInterface::MASTER_REQUEST) {
            return;
        }

        $request = $event->getRequest();

        $clientIp = $request->getClientIp();

        $userAgent = $request->headers->get('user-agent');

        if (...) {
            throw new UserSignatureChangedException();
        }
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Using the service definition below, you could register the event listener:

{lang="xml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
<service id="matthias_security.user_signature_listener"
    class="Matthias\SecurityBundle\EventListener\UserSignatureListener">
    <tag
        name="kernel.event_listener"
        event="kernel.request"
        priority="100"
        method="onKernelRequest" />
</service>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The UserSignatureChangedException that will be thrown in the request listener should of
course be handled by an exception listener (listen to KernelEvents::EXCEPTION), which sets the
appropriate response object, for instance a RedirectResponse to a page where the user can reauthenticate.

#### Long-running sessions

Say, an authenticated user of your application does nothing for a while, but he keeps the browser
open. The session data is not being requested for some time, and its lifetime is almost expired. Then,
the user refreshes the page. The session cookie containing the session ID is set only to expire when
the browser is closed (cookie_lifetime = 0). The cookie will still be valid, as well as the session
data (its lifetime almost expired), so the user can continue with his session as if nothing happened.
This way there is nothing that prevents a user from having an eternal session.
You may want to invalidate these long-running sessions, based on the date they were last used, or
when they were first created. Symfony has no built-in way to do this, but it is very easy to implement
some custom session invalidation yourself. The session has a so-called MetadataBag containing Unix
timestamps for the time the session was first created and the time its data was last changed.

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\GetResponseEvent;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\HttpKernelInterface;

class SessionAgeListener
{
    public function onKernelRequest(GetResponseEvent $event)
    {
        if ($event->getRequestType() !== HttpKernelInterface::MASTER_REQUEST) {
            return;
        }

        $session = $event->getRequest()->getSession();
        $metadataBag = $session->getMetadataBag();

        $lastUsed = $metadataBag->getLastUsed();Authentication and sessions 113
        if ($lastUsed === null) {
            // the session was created just now
            return;
        }

        $createdAt = $metadataBag->getCreated();

        $now = time();

        // $now, $lastUsed and $createdAt are Unix timestamps

        // if a session is being revived after too many seconds:
        $session->invalidate();
        
        // create some nice response to let the user know this happened:
        $event->setResponse(...);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The service definition below activates the SessionAgeListener:

{lang="xml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
<service id="matthias_security.verify_session_listener"
    class="Matthias\SecurityBundle\EventListener\SessionAgeListener">
    <tag
        name="kernel.event_listener"
        event="kernel.request"
        priority="100"
        method="onKernelRequest" />
</service>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #### Logging security-related information
> 
> Whenever something odd happens (the user suddenly has a different IP address, a user
> has tried to log in with the wrong credentials 100 times during the last minute, etc.), you
> should write something to the application’s log file. It should be recognizable that the
> problem is related to security. To get the appropriate logger service, tag your service using
> the monolog.logger tag:
> {lang="xml"}
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> <service id="matthias_security.verify_session_listener"
>     class="...">
>     <argument type="service" id="logger" on-invalid="null" />
>     <tag name="monolog.logger" channel="security" />
> </service>
> {lang="xml"}
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> Whenever you use the injected logger service:
> 1 $this->logger->warning('Old session reused')
> You will see something like this in your log file:
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> [2013-07-06 16:35:45] security.WARNING: Old session reused
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~