## 12 Введение

### 12.1 Symfony and security

The Symfony Standard Edition comes with the Security Component, the SecurityBundle and (until 
version 2.3) the SecurityExtraBundle. When configured for your application (using security.yml), 
you can have the following for free:

- One or more secured areas in your application, protected by for instance a login form or HTTP
authentication.
- Total freedom in retrieving user data.
- Several ways for hashing user passwords.
- A way to log out.
- Security-related events that are dispatched through the application’s event dispatcher.
- Authorization of users based on their roles.
- Configurable session storage handlers (i.e. you can define where session data should be stored).
- Access control list (ACL) functionality, which you can use to assign very specific rights (like
edit, view, delete, etc.) to specific users concerning specific objects.

All the things in the list above are all implemented very well, but the many different concepts 
(like: firewall, authentication listener, authentication provider, exception handler, entry point, ACL, 
ACE, security identity, object identity, etc.) can lead to much confusion. This is why, when you are 
building any application in which there is a difference between authenticated users and guest users, 
or where there are access rights on the object level, you should really read about Security & Symfony. 
There are some good sources on this subject:

- The chapter [Security](http://symfony.com/doc/current/book/security.html) on symfony.com which gives 
you the general outline of authentication and authorization management in a Symfony application.
- The documentation for the [Security Component](http://symfony.com/doc/current/components/security/index.html) 
(written by myself) describes in more detail all the parts of the component that play a role in 
securing your application.

The good thing is, there is much to read. Afterwards you should compare Symfony’s feature set with your 
own wish list or (“should list”). Because, the bad thing is that there are also many things missing. 
Some examples of what’s missing or things that you have to create/check yourself:

- Input sanitizing (almost nothing is done automatically for you, so this will be a larger topic later on).
- Automatic (inactivity/time-based) session invalidation.
- Monitoring/preventing session hijacking.
- Preventing brute-force attacks on login forms.
- Storing/managing user types, roles and groups dynamically. - Showing friendly “access denied” pages.
- Enforcing strong passwords.
- Preventing sensitive information from being cached by browsers.

To be able to judge what should really be done, and exactly which solutions help best to prevent the 
“evil guys” from spoiling the fun, you should also read about PHP security (server configuration amongst 
many things) and (web) application security in general. This is a subject about which many people have 
widely diverging opinions, so after understanding the main problems, you will also need to be able to 
judge the advice given by many different people. I would like to point out one very good source to you, 
namely the book-in-progress [Survive The Deep End: PHP Security](http://phpsecurity.readthedocs.org/en/latest/),
by Pádraic Brady.

When it comes to all the extra security-related measures that are not bundled by default with Symfony, 
I would like to point you to my own website, where I have posted some articles about 
[security enhancements for your application](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/category/security/).
Know your way around in the land of PHP, web application and Symfony security. Don’t trust “the framework” blindly. 
And when you have set up your security preventions: know if and why they work.

### 12.2 Goals: prevention and confinement

There are two ways in which you can enhance the security of your application: first you can try to prevent a bad 
thing from happening, second you can make arrangements so that when it happened anyway, things won’t get too far 
out of hand. The [OWASP Secure Coding Practices - Quick Reference Guide](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Secure_Coding_Practices_-_Quick_Reference_Guide) 
guide puts this as follows: 

    A threat agent interacts with a system, which may have a vulnerability that can be exploited in order to cause 
    an impact.
   
Your Symfony application is a system which almost certainly has vulnerabilities (unless it just displays 
“Hello world!”) and these can be used to break through the thresholds you have placed around your (sensitive) 
data. Though you should do everything you reasonably can to prevent this from happening, you need to think 
about what could happen in the case of a security breach. After all, this could be a matter of a leaked 
password, or even a brute-forced entry to the database server.

What does the “hacker” get, and how much time will it take him to get more? And exactly which data has been 
compromised? Should you inform users about the attack? Which users? Can you track this down? And in the case 
of a credentials database, could the hashed passwords be “unhashed” using brute-force tactics in a reasonable 
amount of time?

For example, when your application has a comment system which allows users to directly write a comment on a 
page, a malevolent user may try to add a JavaScript snippet to a comment. When you don’t have output escaping 
enabled for these comments, the snippet will just end up on the page as if it were application code. 
This would be a serious vulnerability of your application. A threat agent could inject a piece of 
JavaScript that examines document.cookie to find out the ID of the user’s session as it is stored in 
the session cookie. He may then even hijack the user’s session in his own browser.

#### Minimize impact

The JavaScript injection exploit will have quite a big impact, since taking over (any) user’s sessions 
is a very dangerous thing, even more so when the user is an administrator. To minimize the impact you 
should take several security measures. First of all you should configure PHP to mark the session cookie 
as HTTP-only. This makes it impossible to read from or write to the session cookie in JavaScript. Then 
you should find a way to detect hijacked sessions and reject them. There are many more options here, 
and they all reduce the chance of a security breach, but equally important: they also reduce the impact.

#### Reflection
It is clear that you should try to find and remove vulnerabilities and that you should also minimize 
the impact of a possible (even an improbable) attack. But what’s also important is that you know what 
you are trying to achieve by a certain security measure. It helps you with determining the right solution, 
when you know what the problem is that you are trying to solve. Be very reflective about your own ways. 
Sometimes it will occur to you that you are taking measures that won’t help at all, since you already 
have a stronger security measure in place. And sometimes you will notice that one very insecure part 
could indirectly give a threat agent access to another, secure part of the system.

#### Before diving in...

There is so much you can do when it comes to (web) application security - you probably won’t be able to 
implement it all. You also won’t need to. Talk with your team members about the necessary security 
measurements, and some quick wins. But also talk with your manager about the time budget and the importance 
of security for a specific project (or the organization). Security should be a team effort, and a secure 
application comes for the biggest part from awareness and discipline. So make sure that everybody on your 
team thinks alike when it comes to securing the application that you’re creating.

In the following chapters I will show you ways in which you can prevent bad things from
happening to your Symfony application, but also how you can apply some damage control here and there.