## 16 Output escaping

### 16.1 Twig

Symfony developers are told that:

    If you’re using Twig, output escaping is on by default and you’re protected.

Everyone will be very happy after reading this, except a security-minded person, who is very
skeptical about remarks like this. There is no such thing as automatic output escaping that works
in all situations. The default output escaping for Symfony assumes that you are rendering in an
HTML context, at the element level. Also Twig follows many special (though secure rules) for autoescaping, 
which you should know about. Read about all of them in the 
[Twig documentation for developers](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/doc/api.html#escaper-extension).

#### Know your escaping context

Most important is this assumption about the default context being html. This will likely not be the
only context in your application. You need to find out which variables are being printed where and
in what context. Twig supports these contexts out of the box:

- **html** When rendering variables at the HTML element level
- **html_attr** When rendering variables inside HTML attributes
- **js** When rendering variables inside JavaScript code
- **css** When rendering variables inside a stylesheet
- **url** When rendering a part of a URL (like a query parameter)

When you have determined the context and it is something other than html, escape as
appropriate using the Twig escape filter:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 {{ someVariable|escape('js') }}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#### Escaping function output

You always have to be at guard when it comes to auto-escaping. Especially when you create your
own Twig functions, (or filters). The output of your functions will also be automatically escaped in
the current context (usually html):

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
class MyTwigExtension extends \Twig_Extension
{
    public function getFunctions()
    {
        return array(
            \Twig_SimpleFunction('important', function($thing) {
                return sprintf(
                    '<strong>%s</strong> is important to me',
                    $thing
                );
            })
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The result of this function will be auto-escaped, so:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{{ important('My family') }}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Will result in:

{lang="html"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 &lt;strong&gt;My family&lt;/strong&gt; is important to me
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Except when you add an is_safe option when defining the function in your Twig extension:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class MyTwigExtension extends \Twig_Extension
{
    public function getFunctions()
    {
        return array(
            \Twig_SimpleFunction('important', function($thing) {
                ...
            }, array(
                'is_safe' => array('html')
            )
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, the output will not be escaped. _But, so will the input_!

#### Escaping function arguments

When we have marked the output of a function as safe but we nevertheless include function
arguments in this same output, we end up with a totally unsafe function. So:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 {{ important('<script>alert("Security")</script>') }}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Will result in:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 <strong><script>alert("Security")</script></strong> is important to me
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now of course you would not type such a thing in your own templates like this, but most of
the time you just pass some user-supplied value as an argument to Twig functions (and remember
that even most of the things in your database originate from user input). And such a value can be
anything, assuming it may not have been correctly sanitized.

Well, there is an easy solution: add a pre_escape option:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class MyTwigExtension extends \Twig_Extension
{
    public function getFunctions()
    {
        return array(
            \Twig_SimpleFunction('important', function($thing) {
                ...
            }, array(
                'is_safe' => array('html'),
                'pre_escape' => 'html'
            )
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now all arguments provided to the function will first be escaped for the given context.

#### Be wary of the raw filter

You can override any auto-escaping functionality by ending an expression with the raw filter:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{{ message|raw }}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This would escape nothing, and when the message variable contains some HTML, it will be left
as-is. This means that you have to be sure that everything has been done to prevent bad things from
happening. Which in most cases means: you must be sure that this variable has gone through some
kind of sanitizing process (like purifying it using HTMLPurifier, see above). Or (and preferably and)
that the source of the value can be trusted - for example an imported piece of source code, written
by a developer. Not, however, the value of a textarea field submitted by an “administrator”. If the
security of your authentication system has by any means be compromised, someone may enter some
very malevolent text in that specific field and immediately affect many users of your application. I
am not saying that you should be scared, but rather cautious.

> #### Twig security scan
>
> Regularly scan the Twig functions and filters used in your project for the use of is_safe
> and missing pre_escape options. Also verify that every variable with a raw filter originates
> from a trusted source.