## 17 Being secretive

In many cases hacking a system means getting to know as much as possible about its inner workings,
to know what its sensitive and thus exploitable parts are. Therefore you need to be careful about
what you display to outsiders.

### 17.1 Mask authentication errors

The Symfony documentation shows a very bad example of application security, where literal
exception messages are shown above an authentication form (error is an Exception object):

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{% if error %}
    <div>{{ error.message }}</div>
{% endif %}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directly afterwards we are encouraged to “use the exception message wisely”, since it may
contain sensitive information. It definitely will, as I have noticed on many occasions. Sometimes
even raw database errors, including entire schema definitions can end up in the template when you
display the exception message directly.
Luckily all exceptions that extend from AuthenticationException have a method getMessageKey.
When calling this method you get a cleaner exception message, with no (sensitive) details about the
exceptional situation itself. Just simple messages like “Invalid credentials.” or “Authentication request
could not be processed due to a system problem.”.
So the correct Twig template around a login form would display errors like this:

{lang="twig"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{% if error %}
    <div>{{ error.messageKey }}</div>
{% endif %}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### 17.2 Prevent exceptions from showing up

When there are places in your application where you want to use exceptions for showing an error
message to the user, there are three possible strategies. Either use something like described above
(using a getMessageKey() method, which contains a message that is more user-friendly and also
more vague) or wrap lower-level exceptions in more high-level, general exceptions and set a new
message that is safe for display. You should also be wary of general exceptions occurring at deeper
levels of abstraction, which you mistakenly take for one of your own exceptions. You might also
mark some exceptions as safe, by filtering them:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
$error = null;

try {
    // do something dangerous
    ...
} catch (SomeSpecificException $exception) {
    $error = $exception;
} catch (\Exception $previous) {
    // unexpected, and unknown exception
    $error = new GenericException('An error occurred', null, $previous);
}

// $error can be safely used now
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The problem with this approach is that Symfony’s default exception handler (which also logs
exceptions when logging is enabled) will not be notified of the truly unexpected exception. As it is
most likely a symptom of some problem on a deeper level of the application code, this may not be
desired behavior. Therefore, in most situations it suffices to catch specific, known exceptions and let
any other exception just bubble up.

### 17.3 Customize error pages

When such a “normal” exception, indicating a system failure, bubbles up to the standard exception handler, you 
must be sure to prevent anything from being displayed in the response to the user. Any system information leaked to 
a user may be used to determine a strategy for compromising the system. You should therefore 
[create custom error pages](http://symfony.com/doc/master/cookbook/controller/error_pages.html) which 
blend in well with the rest of your
application. Never show any generated information about the problem, especially no stack trace.
Problems will be logged automatically and can also be sent to you by email, either by 
[configuring Monolog to do so](http://symfony.com/doc/master/cookbook/logging/monolog_email.html), or by using 
some other logging tool which sends you alerts when something goes wrong. The latter may be a better choice, 
since maybe the application has become so unstable that it can not be trusted to do so itself.

### 17.4 Be vague about user data

Authentication problems are mostly covered by the Symfony Security Component. There are
however many bad interaction design decisions that may accidentally disclose sensitive information
about users of your system. When your system leaks information about which other users there are,
your system is susceptible to something called “harvesting”. These are some examples of interaction
design that leak information about users.

1. A user can reset his password on the “Forgot password” page which contains an “Email” text
field. When the user provides his email address and submits the form, the system finds the
account record of the corresponding user and generates a “password reset link”, then sends a
mail to the user containing this link. After submitting the form, the page says: “We have sent
a password reset mail to the given email address”.
The problem is: when someone tries to collect email addresses of users, he will now know that
a user with the provided email address actually exists in the system.

2. Same situation as above, but now the message is: “If the provided email address belongs to
one of our users, we have sent a password reset mail to it.”
This seems secure, however: the request duration is notably longer when an email address
is of a known user of the system, than when the email address is unknown. Someone who
is harvesting user email addresses may infer based on the length of the request whether an
email address is known or unknown to the system. This is called a timing attack.

3. When the user is logged in he is allowed to change his email address using a simple form with
one field: “Email”. After submitting the form the system changes the user’s email address or
it shows a message to the user saying: “The provided email address is already in use”.
Again: we now know the email address of a user, even though this is sensitive data.

The best solution to prevent harvesting is to be vague: don’t say if there was a match, if you
have sent an email, etc. You also have to make sure that it can not be guessed if any of these things
has been done by measuring the duration of the request.

The solution to the third problem would be:

1. Allow the user to change his email address, but don’t persist the change immediately.

2. Send an email to the new address, with a link allowing the user to confirm the requested
change.

3. After confirming the change, update the account information with the new email add