## Introduction

The first release of Symfony2 came bundled with the 
[Doctrine Common library](http://docs.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-common/en/latest/). 
This library contains some tools used by all the second-generation Doctrine projects, like the Doctrine ORM,
Doctrine MongoDB ODM, etc. The library offers shared functionality and utility classes, like an
event manager, persistence- related interfaces, some useful base classes and: an annotation reader.

The annotation reader was initially only used by Doctrine ORM to parse annotations inside
entity classes. Doctrine ORM (or Doctrine2) introduced annotations as a way to specify how a simple
PHP class should be mapped to a relational database table:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;

/**
 * @ORM\Entity
 */
class User
{
    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="string")
     */
    private $name;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This “syntactic sugar” was soon recognized to be a really useful alternative for the existing
solutions, like writing down your mapping configuration in a Yaml or XML file. The creators of
Symfony2 also embraced annotations and started adding them to their components as an alternative
way of loading configuration. For instance, the Validator component supports annotations to
configure validation rules for classes. And the Routing component has annotations for linking a
route to a class and one of its methods.

> Annotations: Domain-specific languages
> 
> Annotations have some very interesting characteristics. They are not written in the PHP
> language: @Route("/admin/", name="admin_index") can not be parsed by the PHP
> interpreter. Nevertheless, annotations have a “runtime” aspect, since they are parsed by
> an annotation reader from within a running PHP application. Their mere presence has
> some very real effects on the way the application runs.
> Furthermore, annotations are easy to write. Once you know all the attributes an
> annotation supports, you know all there is to using it in your application. The funny
> thing is: you don’t even need to be a PHP programmer to use an annotation, since you
> are not required to write any PHP code.
> Finally, annotations are always domain-specific. They are introduced as a means to
> convey some high-level concept from a specific domain, like routing, templating,
> persistence, etc. Annotations help you abstract from the details and instead think in
> higher-level concepts.
> 
> These characteristics add up to the following conclusion: we should consider annotations as a form 
> of domain-specific languages ([DSL](http://martinfowler.com/books/dsl.html)). A DSL is a small language that
> is used to convert higher-level concepts into lower-level details. It is implemented in a
> general purpose language like PHP, but can have its own syntax (in this case “annotation
> syntax”).

Each domain specific set of annotations forms a domain-specific language to express
the details underlying the high-level domain concepts. For example, the annotations
provided by Doctrine ORM form a little language to express inside an entity class at
a high level what should happen inside the relational database at a low level to make
it ready for storing entities in it. This means that when you use Doctrine annotations
to configure the mapping for an entity, you don’t have to worry about implementation
details like: what is the best way to define a boolean column, or what was the syntax
for making a column’s value “required” again?

When I first started to work with Symfony2 I saw everyone using annotations. I felt some
hesitation to use them too. It seemed to me quite dangerous to use comments to influence the flow
of an application. Then after a couple of months I got used to working with annotations and as it
happens I never encountered a “dangerous situation” caused by an annotation after all.
Instead, I learned more about annotations: what they really are and how they are used by
Symfony, Doctrine, etc. Soon I started creating my own annotations and using them for many
different purposes inside the Symfony applications I’ve been working on. In this chapter I’d like
to share my findings with you. You will learn about the inner workings of annotations and how
to create them yourself. In the last chapter of this part I show you some Symfony-specific ways in
which you can use annotations to influence the application’s flow.
