## Valid use cases for annotations

You can do all sorts of things with annotations, but in my experience there are just a few valid
use-cases for them.

### Loading configuration

Most often annotations are used as a way to load static configuration for classes. These are some
good examples of libraries that use annotations in this way:

• [Doctrine ORM](https://github.com/doctrine/doctrine2) for mapping entity types to database tables.
• [Symfony Routing Component](https://github.com/symfony/routing) for configuring routes in controller classes.
• [Symfony Validator Component](https://github.com/symfony/validator) for adding validation rules to any class.
• [JMS Serializer](https://github.com/schmittjoh/serializer) for configuring serialization options for any class.

In all of these libraries annotations are used as just a particular source of configuration. They all
offer other, equivalent ways to accomplish the same thing, for instance loading some XML, Yaml or
PHP configuration file. The result of loading configuration from all of these different sources will be
used for the job at hand (preparing a database schema, validating or serializing an object, generating
routes, etc.). In a way, annotations used for loading configuration are nothing special - they are just
one of many ways.

An important characteristic of all these libraries that use annotations as a medium for configuration is that 
they only parse the relevant annotations once, and combine the results with data retrieved
from other sources. The resulting data will be cached in order to make the second run much faster.
After the first run, it does not matter anymore that the data originates from annotations, XML files,
etc. The data has been combined and unified into one format.

> #### Annotations and coupling
>
> Some people complain that annotations increase class coupling. There are arguments
> for and against this position: annotations can be considered as “just comments”, so they
> would definitely not increase class coupling, as class coupling is about how a class itself
> (not its comments) is coupled to other classes. However, when a doc block is being
> parsed, annotations are taken to be class names. So in this sense your class becomes
> coupled to the annotation classes it uses.
> This special kind of coupling becomes very obvious when you have a class that has
> annotations for Doctrine ORM and for the JMS Serializer:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use JMS\Serializer\Annotation as Serialize;
use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM:

class Something
{
    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="string")
     * @Serialize\Type("string")
     */
    private $property;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s say that the project in which you want to use this class does not have the JMS
Serializer as a dependency. But it does have Doctrine ORM and you want to use the
mapping metadata to be able to store instances of Something in your relational database.
Well, as soon as Doctrine starts to read the annotations, it will fail, showing us the
following error:

~~~~~~~~~~~~
[Semantical Error] The annotation "@Serialize\Type" in [...] does not
exist, or could not be auto-loaded.
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a very obvious sign that the Something class is indeed coupled to all of its
annotations. Errors like these are the reason why you should not use annotations in
a class when you want it to be reusable. When used outside the project, chances are it
will fail because it misses a dependency.

Using annotations in classes that are only used inside one project seems fine to me (as
discussed in another part of this book called Configuration conventions. There is no
problem with that, since the class doesn’t need to work in a different context.

### Controlling application flow

Instead of being parsed just once, as part of some configuration loading process, annotations can
also be used for influencing the flow on an application. The best examples are from the 
[SensioFrameworkExtraBundle](https://github.com/sensiolabs/SensioFrameworkExtraBundle) which has 
annotations that control the way the HttpKernel eventually produces a response for a particular request. 
As explained in the first part of this book there are many points during that process at which event listeners 
are allowed to change the outcome. The SensioFrameworkExtraBundle contains multiple event listeners which will 
modify the Request object, create a Response object if none was returned from the controller, or modify a 
given Response object, based on the annotations that were provided in the doc block of a controller.

For example, you can use the 
[@Template annotation](http://symfony.com/doc/current/bundles/SensioFrameworkExtraBundle/annotations/view.html) 
above an action method in a controller class to indicate that the result of executing that action should be used 
as template variables:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Sensio\Bundle\FrameworkExtraBundle\Configuration\Template;

class UserController
{
    /**
     * @Template("MatthiasAdminBundle:User:edit.html.twig")
     */
    public function editAction(User $user)
    {
        return array(
            'user' => $user,
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

To make this work the SensioFrameworkExtraBundle registers an event listener which intercepts
the kernel.controller event and collects @Template annotations for the current controller. It then
tries to figure out which template file should be rendered and stores this file name in a request
attribute called _template. When the controller has been executed and the return value is not a
proper Response object, another event listener intercepts the kernel.view event and renders the
template file mentioned in the request attribute _template using the return value from the controller
as template variables.
