## Using annotations in your Symfony application

As a PHP developer you are likely to write some library every once in a while that needs to load
configuration from different sources, one of which might be annotations. If that is the case, then
I’d like to recommend the [jms/metadata package](https://github.com/schmittjoh/metadata) to you. It 
provides some good tools that help you combine configuration (or “metadata”) from different sources 
and store it as one object in a file cache.

I’ve written a few articles on my blog about using this library to 
[collect metadata using annotations](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2012/03/symfony2-creating-a-metadata-factory-for-processing-custom-annotations/), 
to [add an alternative driver for collecting metadata](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2012/03/symfony2-writing-a-yaml-driver-for-your-metadata-factory/),
and finally to [cache the metadata properly](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2012/04/symfony2-metadata-caching-class-and-propertymetadata/).

In this chapter I choose not to discuss this subject in more detail, since the use of annotations for
collecting metadata is not specific to Symfony applications. In fact, any application or library could
make use of annotations in this way.

We will instead explore some ways in which you can control the application flow using annotations (the second use 
case). This subject was also partly covered on my blog some time ago in an article about 
[preventing controller execution using annotations](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2012/12/prevent-controller-execution-with-annotations-and-return-a-custom-response/). 
In the following sections I will describe a variety of other options that you have when combining annotations 
with kernel events.

### Responding to Request attributes: the @Referrer annotation

Browsers have the useful habit to add a Referer header to a request (unless it is a direct request,
like when you type a URL by hand or select one from your bookmarks). The name of the header
actually contains a spelling error (it should have one extra “r”: Referrer), but there’s nothing we
can do about that, except for making no spelling mistakes ourselves.

The Referer header contains the full URL of the page that was visited by the client before they
requested the current URL. While handling a request you can use it to redirect a client back to where
they came from. Or you could store the previous URL to later analyze which sites refer to your site.

In this particular example I’d like to use the Referer header to apply certain rules. For instance,
some actions inside my application’s controllers should only be executed when the user comes from
a certain other page, and some of them are only available when the previous URL has the same
domain as the current URL. Though this would not be a good security measure, it can be something

that’s nice to have. More importantly it is a good example of how you can influence the application
flow based on an attribute of the current Request object.

> #### Be aware of security issues
> 
> Whenever you make your application logic depend on request attributes, think about any
> security issues that may arise from that. Some particular issues with request attributes are
> described in the chapter about [Security]{#request-attributes}.

Based on the scenario I described above, I should be able to write something like this above my actions:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class SomeController
{
    /**
     * @Referrer(pattern="^/demo", sameDomain=true)
     */
    public function specialAction()
    {
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This would trigger some kind of validation mechanism which takes the Referer header and
checks if its path matches the given pattern and if the referring URL has the same domain as the
current URL.

The corresponding annotation class could look something like this:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\ReferrerBundle\Annotation;

/**
 * @Annotation
 * @Attributes({
 *    @Attribute("pattern", type="string"),
 *    @Attribute("sameDomain", type="boolean")
 * })
 */
class Referrer
{
    public $pattern = '.*';
    public $sameDomain = false;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

None of the attributes are marked as required. Instead I chose to add default values for the class
properties $pattern and $sameDomain.

We want the referrer validation process to be triggered by an annotation that belongs to an action
method of a controller class. What would be a good moment to do so? Well, as you may remember
from the first part of this book: after the controller has been fully determined and resolved, the
kernel dispatches a kernel.controller event. Event listeners are then allowed to do anything that’s
needed, given the current controller. This seems like a perfect fit. So in this case we should create an
event listener that listens to this particular kernel.controller event. When the listener is notified
of such an event, it can inspect the current controller and see if it has a @Referrer annotation.

The ReferrerListener below will do the trick. We’ll make sure that its onKernelController()
method will be triggered when a kernel.controller event is dispatched by the kernel. I assume
that you know how to [register this event listener](#todo).

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\ReferrerBundle\EventListener;

use Doctrine\Common\Annotations\Reader;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\FilterControllerEvent;
use Matthias\ReferrerBundle\Annotation\Referrer;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;

class ReferrerListener
{
    private $annotationReader;

    public function __construct(Reader $annotationReader)
    {
        $this->annotationReader = $annotationReader;
    }

    public function onKernelController(FilterControllerEvent $event)
    {
        // the current controller callable
        $controller = $event->getController();

        if (!is_array($controller)) {
            // we only know how to handle a callable that looks like
            // array($controllerObject, 'nameOfActionMethod')
            return;
        }

        // the annotation reader needs a reflection object like this
        $action = new \ReflectionMethod($controller[0], $controller[1]);

        $referrerAnnotation = $this
            ->annotationReader
            ->getMethodAnnotation(
                $action,
                'Matthias\ReferrerBundle\Annotation\Referrer'
            );

        // $referrerAnnotation is either an instance of Referrer or null
        if (!($referrerAnnotation instanceof Referrer)) {
            return;
        }

        $this->validateReferrer($event->getRequest(), $referrerAnnotation);
    }

    private function validateReferrer(
        Request $request,
        Referrer $configuration
    ) {
        $actualReferrer = $request->headers->get('referer');

        $pattern = $configuration->pattern;
        $sameDomain = $configuration->sameDomain;

        // do anything you like
        // maybe throw an exception if you don't like it
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Make sure that the service you create for this event listener will receive the annotation_reader
service as its first constructor argument.

> #### Annotations will be cached
> 
> When you depend on the Doctrine annotation reader, always type-hint
> to the interface Doctrine\Common\Annotations\Reader. Symfony itself uses
> Doctrine\Common\Annotations\Reader\CachedReader class which is an implementation
> of that interface. It is a proxy for the regular AnnotationReader class. The cached reader
> will cache the parsed annotations as serialized objects. In the case of a Symfony application
> those parsed annotations are stored in the app/cache/{env}/annotations directory. For
> example, the cached array of method annotations for the specialAction() method (see
> above) looks like this:
> 
> {lang="php"}
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~
> <?php return unserialize('a:1:{i:0;O:43:"Matthias\ReferrerBundle\Annotation
> \Referrer":2:{s:7:"pattern";s:6:"^/demo";s:10:"sameDomain";b:1;}}');
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~

### Prevent controller execution: the @RequiresCredits annotation

In the following example I want to either prevent or allow execution of a given controller based
on the amount of credits the current user has. Imagine that our application has some kind of credit
system. The user can buy credits and then he is able to visit certain pay-per-view pages. For example:
page A costs 100 credits. When a user has 150 credits, after visiting page A they have only 50 credits
left. They will not be able to visit that same page again, unless they buy some extra credits.
I image it to look something like this:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class PayPerViewController
{
    /**
     * @RequiresCredits(100)
     */
    public function expensiveAction()
    {
        ...
    }

    /**
     * @RequiresCredits(50)
     */
    public function cheapAction()
    {
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

First let’s implement the corresponding annotation class:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\CreditsBundle\Annotation;

/**
 * @Annotation
 * @Attributes({
 *   @Attribute("credits", type="integer", required=true)
 * })
 */
class RequiresCredits
{
    public $credits;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Then, just like in the previous example, we need to listen to the kernel.controller event and
analyze the current controller and action, looking for a @RequiresCredits annotation to see if credits
are required to execute this action:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\CreditsBundle\EventListener;

use Matthias\CreditsBundle\Annotation\RequiresCredits;
use Matthias\CreditsBundle\Exception\InsufficientCreditsException;
use Doctrine\Common\Annotations\Reader;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\FilterControllerEvent;

class CreditsListener
{
    private $annotationReader;

    public function __construct(Reader $annotationReader)
    {
        $this->annotationReader = $annotationReader;
    }

    public function onKernelController(FilterControllerEvent $event)
    {
        $controller = $event->getController();

        if (!is_array($controller)) {
            return;
        }
    
        $action = new \ReflectionMethod($controller[0], $controller[1]);
    
        $annotation = $this
            ->annotationReader
            ->getMethodAnnotation(
                $action,
                'Matthias\CreditsBundle\Annotation\RequiresCredits'
        );
    
        if (!($annotation instanceof RequiresCredits)) {
            return;
        }
    
        $amountOfCreditsRequired = $annotation->credits;
    
        // somehow determine if the user can afford to call this action
        $userCanAffordThis = ...;

        if (!$userCanAffordThis) {
            // now what?
            ...
        }
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of course, the calculations that need to be made to calculate if the user can afford to visit this
page should be done by a specialized service, to be injected as a constructor argument.
The question arises: what should we do next to prevent the HttpKernel from executing the
controller when the user currently can not afford it. There are several different options here:

1. You can replace the current controller with another one, for instance a controller that renders
a page where the user can buy some extra credits.
2. You can throw an exception, for instance an InsufficientCreditsException.

If you choose the first option then you should replace the current controller with a valid PHP
callable. You could create a new controller on the spot, but it would be better to have it injected as
a constructor argument:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class CreditsListener
{
    ...
    private $creditsController;

    public function __construct(
        ...
        CreditsController $creditsController
    ) {
        ...
        $this->creditsController = $creditsController;
    }

    public function onKernelController(FilterControllerEvent $event)
    {
        ...

        // replace the current controller with another one
        $event->setController(
            array(
                $this->creditsController,
                'buyAction'
            )
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you choose the second option, you could throw a custom exception, like this:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\CreditsBundle\Exception;

class InsufficientCreditsException extends \RuntimeException
{
    public function __construct($creditsRequired)
    {
        parent::__construct(
            sprintf(
                'User can not afford to pay %d credits',
                $creditsRequired
            )
        );
    }
}

class CreditsListener
{
    ...

    public function onKernelController(FilterControllerEvent $event)
    {
        ...

        throw new InsufficientCreditsException($annotation->credits);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Just throwing an exception would result in the standard error page to be shown. Instead, you
might want to customize the response for this particular exception. You can accomplish this by
registering an event listener for the kernel.exception event. The event listener would receive
a GetResponseForExceptionEvent object. It could then check if the exception that triggered the
event is an instance of InsufficientCreditsException and if so, render a proper response for that
exception, like a page where the user can buy some extra credits. It would look something like this:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Bundle\FrameworkBundle\Templating\EngineInterface;

class CreditsListener
{
    ...
    private $templating;

    public function __construct(
        ...
        EngineInterface $templating // inject the "templating" service here
    ) {
        ...
        $this->templating = $templating;
    }

    public function onKernelException(GetResponseForExceptionEvent $event)
    {
        $exception = $event->getException();
        if (!($exception instanceof InsufficientCreditsException)) {
            return;
        }

        $response = $this
            ->templating
            ->renderResponse(
                'MatthiasCreditsBundle::insufficientCredits.html.twig',
                array(
                    'requiredCredits' => $exception->getRequiredCredits()
                )
            );

        $event->setResponse($response);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of returning a standard error page, the HttpKernel will return the Response object
provided by the CreditsListener.

### Modify the response: the @DownloadAs annotation

The last example in this chapter is about modifying the Response object based on a controller
annotation.

When you want the result of a controller action to be offered to the client as a downloadable
file, you have to do something like this inside your action:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\ResponseHeaderBag;

class SomeController
{
    public function downloadAction()
    {
        $response = new Response('body of the response');

        $dispositionHeader = $response->headers->makeDisposition(
            ResponseHeaderBag::ATTACHMENT,
            'filename.txt'
        );

        $response
            ->headers
            ->set('Content-Disposition', $dispositionHeader);

        return $response;
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is rather verbose and it is not good to have this type of difficult-to-read code inside every
action that offers something for download.

Verbosity and repetitiveness in controller actions are often a sign that some of its functionality
needs to be moved to a dedicated service. But sometimes it is a hint that the functionality might be
pushed to an event listener instead, which does its magic at the right moment during the process of
handling a request.

In this case it is safe to assume that creating an event listener would be the right thing to do. It
would need to listen to the kernel.response event. This event is dispatched just before the Response
object is handed back to the front controller, which is the right moment to turn the response into a
downloadable file by adding the Content-Disposition header to it:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\DownloadBundle\EventListener;

use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\ResponseHeaderBag;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\FilterResponseEvent;

class DownloadListener
{
    public function onKernelResponse(FilterResponseEvent $event)
    {
        // we still need to determine the filename
        $downloadAsFilename = ...;

        $response = $event->getResponse();

        $dispositionHeader = $response
            ->headers
            ->makeDisposition(
                ResponseHeaderBag::DISPOSITION_ATTACHMENT,
                $downloadAsFilename
            );

        $response
            ->headers
            ->set('Content-Disposition', $dispositionHeader);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

If we would register this event listener right now, every response to every request would
be offered as a downloadable file. This is not what we want. The response should only be a
downloadable file if the controller action is marked as “downloadable”. Let’s do that by introducing
a @DownloadAs annotation:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class SomeController
{
    /**
     * @DownloadAs("users.csv")
     */
    public function downloadAction()
    {
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

We could implement the @DownloadAs annotation as follows:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\DownloadBundle\Annotation;

/**
 * @Annotation
 * @Attributes({
 * @Attribute("filename", type="string", required=true)
 * })
 */
class DownloadAs
{
    public $filename;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now we need a way to find out if the action that was executed has a @DownloadAs annotation.
Unfortunately, inside the onKernelResponse() method we know nothing about the controller that
was used to produce the response. This means that we have to hook into the process earlier, at
a moment when we do know the controller. Again, the best thing to do would be to listen to
the kernel.controller event and use the annotation reader to find out if it has a @DownloadAs
annotation.

We can add another method to the DownloadListener class: onKernelController(). It should be
notified of the kernel.controller event. We use the annotation reader to look for the @DownloadAs
annotation. If such an annotation was found, we store the suggested filename as an attribute of the
current Request object:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Matthias\DownloadBundle\Annotation\DownloadAs;
use Doctrine\Common\Annotations\Reader;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\FilterControllerEvent;

class DownloadListener
{
    private $annotationReader;

    public function __construct(Reader $annotationReader)
    {
        $this->annotationReader = $annotationReader;
    }

    public function onKernelController(FilterControllerEvent $event)
    {
        // this is more or less the same as in previous examples
        $controller = $event->getController();
        if (!is_array($controller)) {
            return;
        }
        $action = new \ReflectionMethod($controller[0], $controller[1]);

        $annotation = $this
            ->annotationReader
            ->getMethodAnnotation(
                $action,
                'Matthias\DownloadBundle\Annotation\DownloadAs'
            );

        if (!($annotation instanceof DownloadAs)) {
            return;
        }

        // store the filename as a request attribute
        $event->getRequest()->attributes->set(
            '_download_as_filename',
            $annotation->filename
        );
    }

    ...
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Don’t forget to register this class as a service and register it as an event listener for both the
kernel.controller and the kernel.response event.

Now when the controller for a request has been determined, the DownloadListener::onKernelController()
method looks for a relevant @DownloadAs annotation, copies the filename from it and stores that
filename as the _download_as_filename request attribute.

The only thing we need to do is to check inside the onFilterResponse() method if that same
attribute has been provided. Only if it is, then the response should be available for download (i.e.
have an “attachment” disposition), otherwise it will do nothing and return early:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class DownloadListener
{
    ...

    public function onKernelResponse(FilterResponseEvent $event)
    {
        $downloadAsFilename = $event
            ->getRequest()
            ->attributes
            ->get('_download_as_filename');
    
        if ($downloadAsFilename === null) {
            // the response should not be a downloadable file
            return;
        }
    
        $response = $event->getResponse();
    
        // set the content disposition
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~