# VII Быть Symfony разработчиком

Many of the developers that I know call themselves “PHP developer”. Some of them might even say
that they are a “Symfony developer”. Others will say, “I am a developer”, without revealing their
favorite programming language or the only programming language they master.

When I started to work with Symfony, I almost immediately fell somewhat in love with this
great framework. Its first version was already so much better than what I was used to. But the
second version was just the right thing for my mind - I started learning a lot about it, digging
deep into its code, writing documentation for parts that were still undocumented, writing articles
about how to accomplish certain things with Symfony, and speaking in public about Symfony and
Symfony-related PHP libraries.

After all of this, I would call myself a Symfony developer now. But the best part of the story is:
everything that I learned from and while working with Symfony, is generally applicable to software
written “for” any other PHP framework. Even when I work with a non-Symfony or a “legacy” PHP
application (with no reused code at all), it still pays off to think about ways in which I can use code
from the “Symfony ecosystem”, or in fact, from any library that I can pull in using Composer, and
make it a better application.

In this part I will demonstrate that being a good Symfony developer is about knowing the
framework well, but then writing code that would be beneficent for any PHP project out there
and finishing with a tiny layer between this code and the Symfony framework so that most of your
code will be reusable even if it is being transferred to a non-Symfony project.