## Повторно используемый код должен быть надёжным

### Add enough tests

When your code should be stable and maintainable at any rate, it needs enough tests. What is
enough? Maybe you don’t need a 100 percent coverage, but at least the use cases that you say your
code supports should be verified to work correctly using unit tests.

Writing the tests will not be such a difficult task, since when you followed my advice in the
previous section, your bundle consists of small classes, and many of them have interfaces, so they
should already be very test-friendly.

After you have tested the true units of your bundle, all the little classes in there, it is time to
test them all together. In other words: write integration tests. In my bundles, this means most of the
times manually instantiating some classes, prepare some constructor arguments and create some
more objects, and finally run a single method on one of these objects (while keeping track of which
is which). This step is important, as you want to find and fix any problems without going back to
the browser after many hours of fast and furious coding in your favorite editor.

> #### Use a simple service container for integration tests
> 
> When you start writing integration tests, and you have indeed created many small classes
> that work together, the setup code for your tests may become quite large, with lots of new
> operators. To be able to reuse the setup code and to enhance its maintainability, you should
> consider using a simple service container like Pimple for managing the object graph that
> is required for your integration test. See also [PHPUnit & Pimple: Integration Tests with a
> Simple DI Container](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2013/06/phpunit-pimple-integration-tests-with-a-simple-di-container/).

#### Test your bundle extension and configuration

Something that is missing in the test suites of many bundles: unit tests for framework-specific classes
like the Bundle class and, when applicable its Extension and Configuration class. You can usually
skip the Bundle class, but the Extension and Configuration classes have logic that should be tested.
After all, you want to make sure that all things inside your bundle are tied together correctly.
To test the bundle’s extension class, you only need a ContainerBuilder instance. Then run the
load() method of the extension and provide it with an array of config arrays:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\AccountBundle\Tests\DependencyInjection;

use Symfony\Component\DependencyInjection\ContainerBuilder;
use Matthias\AccountBundle\DependencyInjection\MatthiasAccountExtension;

class MatthiasAccountExtensionTest extends \PHPUnit_Framework_TestCase
{
    public function testLoadsDoctrineORMServicesWhenEnabled()
    {
        $container = new ContainerBuilder();
        $extension = new MatthiasAccountExtension();

        $configs = array(
            array(
                'storage_engine' => 'doctrine_orm',
            )
        );
        $extension->load($configs, $container);

        $this->assertTrue(
            $container->has('matthias_account.doctrine_orm.storage')
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #### Configuration arrays
> 
> Please note that you have to provide an array of arrays as configuration values. This
> is the way application configuration works: the values can originate for instance from
> both config_dev.yml and config.yml. The configuration Processor merges these separate
> arrays into one.

> #### Use the SymfonyDependencyInjectionTest library
> 
> Testing a bundle extension class (and compiler passes for that matter) will be much easier when you use the 
> [SymfonyDependencyInjectionTest](https://github.com/matthiasnoback/SymfonyDependencyInjectionTest) library. 
> It contains base classes for your own PHPUnit test cases and custom PHPUnit assertions.

Testing the bundle configuration is mainly an exercise in testing the Config Component itself.
But since the code in the Configuration class is itself configuration (think one second longer about
that…), you need to make sure that this configuration is sound. This is how you can do it:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\AccountBundle\Tests\DependencyInjection;

use Matthias\AccountBundle\DependencyInjection\Configuration;
use Symfony\Component\Config\Definition\Processor;

class ConfigurationTest extends \PHPUnit_Framework_TestCase
{
    public function testHasSensibleDefaults()
    {
        $configurations = array();
        $processedConfig = $this->processConfiguration($configurations);

        $expectedConfiguration = array(
            'user_types' => array('user', 'administrator'),
            'send_confirmation_mail' => true
        );

        $this->assertSame($expectedConfiguration, $processedConfig);
    }

    private function processConfiguration(array $configValues)
    {
        $configuration = new Configuration();

        $processor = new Processor();

        return $processor->processConfiguration(
            $configuration,
            $configValues
        );
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> ####  Use the SymfonyConfigTest library
> 
> Testing your Configuration class will be easier when you use the 
> [SymfonyConfigTest](https://github.com/matthiasnoback/SymfonyConfigTest) library. It contains a base class for 
> your own PHPUnit test case and custom PHPUnit assertions.