## Reusable code should be easy to use

### Add documentation

The Symfony Cookbook article about 
[best practices for creating bundles](http://symfony.com/doc/master/bundles/best_practices.html) recommends writing
documentation for bundles. The proposed format is [Re-Structured Text](http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html) 
and the main entry point should be Resources/doc/index.rst. However, many PHP projects I know of also have a README.md
file (which is in the [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax) format), describing in a 
few words what the project is about and how to install it.

Documentation should cover at least:

- The main concepts in the design of your code.
- Use cases, illustrated with code and configuration examples.
- Service tags that can be used to extend functionality.
- Events that are being dispatched.
- Any [flow-controlling exceptions](http://php-and-symfony.matthiasnoback.nl/2012/12/prevent-controller-execution-with-annotations-and-return-a-custom-response/)
that can be thrown.

> #### Documentation for internal projects
> 
> When your bundle is going to be used only by your fellow developers, you should not
> expect them to read your documentation. They will just try to start using it, and you are in
> the same room with them, so they will just ask you if anything doesn’t work as expected.
> However, you still need to provide some documentation for internal projects, to prevent
> future problems in case you would accidentally or purposefully leave the team.

### Throw helpful exceptions

Chances are that someone trying to use your bundle will encounter some problems. Maybe you
forgot to make some requirements explicit, maybe you made some other assumptions about how
and in what situation the bundle’s services would be used. In order to help your “user” to overcome
any problem in this area, you should throw helpful exceptions, which point him in the direction of
the solution.

#### Use specific exception classes

Choose your exception classes well, and preferably add some exception classes yourself:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\ImportBundle\Exception;

class WrongFormatException extends \RuntimeException
{
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This allows someone to catch exceptions from which the application may still be able to recover:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
try {
    $this->loadFile($file);
} catch (WrongFormatException $exception) {
    // ...
} catch (FileNotFoundException $exception) {
    // ...
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

#### Set detailed and friendly messages

There is a common misconception that you should not put all the relevant details in the message
of an exception. This would be bad for “security”. Well, since you should prepare your production
environment to display no error messages at all, there’s no problem in giving full disclosure in an
exception message. On the contrary: you should provide all relevant details. So, use sprintf() to
construct a nice and friendly message:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
throw new \InvalidArgumentException(sprintf(
    'Tag "%s" for service "%s" should have an "alias" attribute',
    $tagName,
    $serviceId
));
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In contrast with things like:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
throw new \OutOfBoundsException('You are a hacker');
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Which would communicate very clearly your opinion about the user, but not help a developer
in finding out what he can do to prevent the error.