## Повторно используемый код должен быть легко переносимым

The main characteristic of mobile code is that you should be able to take the code and easily transfer
it to another application. After installing the code in another project, you know that it is mobile
when:

- You can easily fix bugs in the code, even though the code has been duplicated many times.
- It does not fail because of another library, component, bundle or PHP extension that is not
present in the other project.
- You can easily configure it to work with another database and maybe even another type of
database.
- It does not fail because certain database tables or collections don’t exist.
- It does not fail because it is placed in an unusual directory inside the project.

### Dependency management and version control

The first two characteristics of mobile code are related to infrastructure: when reused, your code
should not merely be duplicated - it should still be under version control so that each bug-fix can
be easily distributed over the different copies of the code.

You can do this using a mechanism like externals, or sub-modules (depending on the type of
version control software that you use), but the better way is to use [Composer](http://getcomposer.org/). 
Each piece of code that you want to share between projects should be in its own repository. In case you 
want to keep the code for yourself (or for your company): host the repository privately, on 
[GitHub](https://github.com/), [Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/), etc. When you want to make your code 
open source, GitHub would be the currently fashionable place.

In both cases you need a composer.json file. This file will basically make your code known as
something coherent: a package. In composer.json you can define the requirements (PHP version,
PHP extensions and other libraries), you can instruct the autoloader on where to find classes and
functions, and you can add some information about yourself, the package, and the tags it should
have.

As an example: this is a somewhat modified composer.json from the knplabs/gaufrette library:

{lang="json"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
{
    "name": "knplabs/gaufrette",
    "type": "library",
    "description": "Library that provides a filesystem abstraction layer",
    "keywords": ["file", "filesystem", "media", "abstraction"],
    "minimum-stability": "dev",
    "homepage": "http://knplabs.com",
    "license": "MIT",
    "authors": [
        {
            "name": "KnpLabs Team",
            "homepage": "http://knplabs.com"
        }
    ],
    "require": {
        "php": ">=5.3.2"
    },
    "require-dev": {
        "amazonwebservices/aws-sdk-for-php": "1.5.*",
        "phpspec/phpspec2": "dev-master",
        "rackspace/php-cloudfiles": "*",
        "doctrine/dbal": ">=2.3",
        "dropbox-php/dropbox-php": "*",
        "herzult/php-ssh": "*",
        "phpunit/phpunit": "3.7.*"
    },
    "suggest": {
        "knplabs/knp-gaufrette-bundle": "*",
        "dropbox-php/dropbox-php": "to use the Dropbox adapter",
        "amazonwebservices/aws-sdk-for-php": "to use the Amazon S3 adapter",
        "doctrine/dbal": "to use the Doctrine DBAL adapter",
        "ext-zip": "to use the Zip adapter"
    },
    "autoload": {
        "psr-0": { "Gaufrette": "src/" }
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The list of requirements should be exhaustive for all the core functionality of your package.
When the package contains classes that can be used optionally, which require extra dependencies,
mention them under suggest. When you have written tests for these classes (like you should) make
sure to list these extra dependencies together with your testing framework under require-dev so
that all tests can be executed by anyone and no test will fail or get skipped because of a missing
dependency.

#### Package repositories

Whenever a repository has a composer.json in its root directory, you can submit it as a package on
[Packagist](https://packagist.org/). This will effectively make your code open source. When you don’t 
want this to happen, you can also privately host a package repository using [Satis](https://github.com/composer/satis). 
This works great for sharing code over many projects in the same company.

After creating the composer.json based on what your code really needs, and registering it as
a package, either using Packagist or Satis, you can install the package in any of your projects by
running:

~~~~~~~~~
composer.phar require [name-of-package] 0.1.*
~~~~~~~~~

Now, your code also complies with the second characteristic of mobile code: after installing it,
it will not fail because of missing or incorrect dependencies.

### Hard-coded storage layer

#### Auto-mapped entities

One of the biggest problems with bundles out there is that some of them define entity classes
(using for instance annotations) and then put them in the Entity directory inside the bundle. This
automatically makes these specific entities available in your project. This may seem nice, but in most
situations it is not: you are then not able to choose your own schema, add extra fields, or maybe
leave out the entities entirely and redefine the model using, for instance, MongoDB.

When a bundle enforces a specific storage layer like described above, you will notice this as soon
as you run a command like doctrine:schema:update: suddenly all kinds of tables are being created,
beyond your control basically, since by enabling the bundle in which there are defined, these will
automatically be registered. The same problem arises when you run doctrine:migrations:diff.
Then a migration script will be generated for creating these tables that you never wanted in the first
place.

#### Storage-agnostic models

The right way to define your bundle’s model is to provide base classes. These base classes contain
all the usual getters, setters and other methods for modifying or inspecting the state of an object.
They have protected properties (instead of the usual private properties) with no mapping-related
annotations at all. These storage-agnostic model classes should reside in the Model directory of
your bundle, and they should not contain any code which is specific for their manager (like an
EntityManager or a DocumentManager).

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\MessageBundle\Model;

class Message
{
    protected $body;

    public function getBody()
    {
        return $this->body;
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This allows developers who want to use your bundle to extend from the base class and define
any metadata required for mapping the data to some kind of database in their own way:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
namespace Matthias\ProjectBundle\Entity;

use Matthias\MessageBundle\Model\Message as BaseMessage;
use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;

/**
 * @ORM\Entity
 */
class Message extends BaseMessage
{
    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="text")
     */
    protected $body;

    // Application specific data:

    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="integer")
     */
    protected $upVotes;

    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="integer")
     */
    protected $downVotes;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

As you can see, this will also allow someone to add extra fields which are not defined in the
reusable, generic model. Make sure your bundle has a configuration option for setting the userdefined model class:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
matthias_message:
    message_class: Matthias\ProjectBundle\Entity\Message
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> #### Model classes are library code (actually)
> 
> As suggested earlier you should move any code that is not specific for Symfony applications
> to their own libraries. The same applies to model classes. They should not be part of a
> bundle, but part of a library.

#### Object managers

Even when you have defined a storage-agnostic model, it does not mean that your entire bundle
needs to be storage-agnostic. The only thing you need to take care of is that the users of your bundle
should be able to implement their own storage handling and disable the standard way that you implemented. You can 
do this by applying the [strategy pattern for loading exclusive services](#todo), and by making use of aliases.

Also, you should not forget to make the names of entity managers, document managers, etc.
configurable. For instance Doctrine ORM allows users to define different entity managers for
different entity classes. So even though the default entity manager is the right entity manager
in most cases, you should add a configuration key for it in your bundle’s configuration.

### 25.3 Hard-coded filesystem references

Make sure your bundle does not contain any hard-coded filesystem references outside* the bundle
itself. You may assume that anything starting from the root of your bundle is in your control, but the
location of the vendor directory, or the web directory, or any other directory should be considered
unknown. In fact, they are: when it comes to the directory structure, nothing is fixed when using
Symfony. There are only “sensible defaults”.

Any reference you want to make to any file above ./ should be configurable in config.yml
as part of your bundle’s configuration. You may of course offer sensible defaults, so your bundle
works out-of-the-box when installed in a standard Symfony project. The standard way to accomplish
this is to define a scalar node in your configuration tree, with a default value. Then process the
configuration in the load() method of your bundle’s extension class and define a parameter for
it. This parameter can later be injected, for instance as a constructor argument. See also [Define
parameters in a container extension](#todo).

#### Using the filesystem

When your bundle requires a location other than the database to store data, like uploaded files,
consider making the bundle filesystem-independent. Since not every application has write-access to
the hard disk of the server it is hosted on, you may choose to use a filesystem abstraction layer, like
[Gaufrette](https://github.com/KnpLabs/Gaufrette). It has adapters for many kinds of filesystems (local or remote), 
and your services won’t notice anything when you switch between them. There is also a 
[GaufretteBundle](https://github.com/KnpLabs/KnpGaufretteBundle) which further eases integration of the 
library with your Symfony bundles.