## Reusable code should be open for extension

Code that is reusable has to be flexible. A user of your bundle should be able to configure services in
a different way than they were configured in the original project you developed it for. He should also
be able to replace any service of the bundle with a custom implementation, without the entire system
falling apart. In other words, reusable code should adhere to the principle “open for extension, closed
for modification”. The user should not be forced to change the original code, but only to replace or
extend specific parts in order to better support his needs.

### Configurable behavior

To make your bundle flexible, it should have a rich set of configurable options, with sensible defaults
and information about what a certain option means. Only the services that are requested based on
these configuration values provided by the developer in for instance config.yml should be fully
loaded. See also the part of this book about [Patterns of dependency injection](#todo). It contains many
suggestions on how to make a bundle configurable.

### Everything should be replaceable

By using a compiler pass (see also [Patterns of dependency injection](#todo)) it is possible to replace any
previously created service definition with your own service definition, or to change the class or any
argument of existing service definitions. This means that when a developer wants to replace part of
the functionality of your bundle with his own, there will in theory always be a way to accomplish
this. There are still some things that you have to do, to help developers with replacing just what
they need to replace, while keeping other parts of the bundle unchanged.

> #### Many small classes, many single responsibilities
> 
> Most likely you share this experience with me: you have tried to use an open source bundle
> but you did not like part of the functionality offered by it. You tried to replace part of it,
> but this part got bigger and bigger until you almost developed your own bundle (and then
> you better should in my opinion!). The problem usually is that there is too little “separation
> of concerns” in such a bundle: some big classes try to do too many things. The lesson for
> you being:
> 
> - Write many small classes, with just a few methods and a single (conceptual) responsibility.
> - Create many small services for these classes.

#### Use lots of interfaces

Define lots of interfaces for the classes that you use, both in your bundle and in the corresponding
library code. Interfaces are literally the contracts that are signed between one object and another. A
class that implements an interface says: don’t worry about how I do things exactly, this is how you
can talk to me.

A traditional example, using only classes:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class Translator
{
    public function trans($id, array $parameters = array())
    {
        ...
    }

    ... lots of other methods
}

class TranslationExtension
{
    private $translator;

    public function __construct(Translator $translator)
    {
        $this->translator = $translator;
    }

    public function trans($id, array $parameters = array())
    {
        return $this->translator->trans($id, $parameters);
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

It has this service definition:

{lang="xml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
<service id="translator" class="...">
</service>

<service id="twig.extension.trans" class="...">
    <argument type="service" id="translator" />
</service>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a developer wants to replace the translator, he needs to extend from the existing
Translator class to satisfy the constructor argument type-hinted Translator:

{lang="php+xml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class MyTranslator extends Translator
{
    ...
}

<service id="my_translator" class="MyTranslator">
</service>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

But now MyTranslator inherits everything that is already in the Translator class, even though
it is going to do things very differently.

A much better solution would be to define an interface for translators:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
interface TranslatorInterface
{
    public function trans($id, array $parameters = array());
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The only thing a replacement translator has to do, is implement this interface:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class MyTranslator implements TranslatorInterface
{
    public function trans($id, array $parameters = array())
    {
        // do things very differently
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, any existing type-hints should be changed from Translator to TranslatorInterface:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
class TranslationExtension
{
    public function __construct(TranslatorInterface $translator)
    {
        ...
    }
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~

And now nothing stands in the way of replacing the existing translator service with the my_-
translator service, either removing the existing definition, adding a new definition, by changing
the class of the existing definition or by defining an alias from translator to my_translator.

> #### Cohesive interfaces
> 
> When trying to find out what methods really belong to an interface, strive for a coherent set
> of methods, that would definitely belong to any (future) class that implements the interface.

#### Use the bundle configuration to replace services

As I mentioned before, you could in theory replace everything there is in the service container by
something you created yourself. There are many ways to do this. But they are all not so clean and
they won’t be good for maintainability. The best way I’ve seen so far is to allow other developers to
replace specific services, by providing service ids through the bundle configuration:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
# in /app/config/config.yml
matthias_message:
    # point to a specific service that should be used
    message_domain_manager: matthias_project.message_domain_manager
~~~~~~~~~~~~

### Add extension points

You can make behavior configurable, or allow others to replace parts of your bundle. But you can
also add ways to extend the behavior of your bundle.

#### Service tags

One way to allow other bundles in an application to extend the behavior of your bundle, is to make
use of service tags. You could think of the way you can register form types that can be used in the
entire application:

{lang="xml"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
<service id="address_type" class="...">
    <tag name="form.type" alias="address" />
</service>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Using a compiler pass you can find all services with a given tag and do whatever you want with
them. See also Service tags for implementation details and more examples.

#### Events

Events are great for allowing other parts of an application to hook into the execution of your bundle’s
code. You could use events to simply notify the system that something has happened:

{lang="php"}
~~~~~~~~~~~~
$eventDispatcher->dispatch(
    'matthias_account.account_created',
    new AccountEvent($account)
);
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Or you could use an event object to let other parts of the application modify (filter) some value,
like the Symfony kernel itself does, when it dispatches its kernel events (see also Early response).